JAMES: Previously on
Twelve Monkeys...
She said Iwas Primary.
You are Primary.
JENNIFER: The things / see.
The changes made in time.
Primary?
| see everything.
CASSIE: We destroyed
the virus.
Iapologize, Dr. Eckland,
you were not part of
my original reality.
JAMES: What are you doing?
Deacon’s gonna
kill him there.
Not before he tells
us everything he knows.
Those Messengers out there,
in the hoods.
What do they want?
KATARINA: My machine.
We don’t know
where they went. Or when.
JAMES: 1944.
That's where I think
the Messengers went.
(UPBEAT SONG
PLAYING ON TURNTABLE)
Glennis. The limo's here.
One minute.
(SONG DISTORTING)
(GASPS)
(GRUNTS)
(GROANS)
(GLENNIS CHOKING)
(SONG PLAYING LOUDER)
Mr. Applebaum?
(GASPS)
You almost gave me
a coronary.
I'm so sorry we
kept you waiting.
My wife is on
what I like to call
Glennis Standard Time.
Oh, Russell, shush.
What is it?
Our entire lives
have led to this moment.
The world will be
forever changed.
(INDISTINCT CHATTER)
(SONG PLAYING ON TURNTABLE)
(MACHINES WHIRRING)
In the last eight months,
ever since the Messengers
used our machine,
we've had tremendous
spikes across the
temporal spectrum.
I'm aware.
But last night's
data showed
these anomalies
multiplying in
the time stream.
An increase of 80%.
These levels
are unprecedented.
It's almost as if
the structure
of space-time
is collapsing
somehow in some way...
It's what?
Collapsing onto itself!
Dr. Ecklandl
Doctor!
Ecklandl
lfyou please!
(MUSIC STOPS)
Forgive me for asking,
but I understand
Dr. Eckland has moved
out of your quarters.
As far as
the time stream goes,
I don't know what is
causing those anomalies.
Everything seems to be
increasingly unpredictable.
My suggestion is
we all just get used
to the new normal.
(GRUNTING)
Cole, get him. Yeah!
Whoa!
Yes!
(BOTH GRUNTING)
Oh.
Get up. What are you...
Yeah!
Get up. Yes!
Kick him.
CASSIE: Hey!
What the hell is this?
Jones promised me
this bullshit was over.
You raise your
voice to her again
and I'll chew your
goddamn face off.
It's all right.
JAMES: Yeah, it's all right.
Go nurse your wounds, Teddy.
Huh?
Stop it! Both of you.
We're trying to
figure out where
the Messengers
went in the machine.
And your boyfriend
is holding out on us.
They didn't fill me
in on a whole lot.
Including the part
where they tried
to kill me.
He's the asshole
that brought him here
in the first place.
Mea culpa.
We stopped their plan
to release the virus.
Whatever's going on now,
he's got nothing to do with.
And what about 1944?
JAMES: (SIGHS) What about it?
RAMSE: Nice tux.
This is a relationship
I will never understand.
You should hear
what you just said.
DEACON: Oh.
Are you sore about us?
Hey, guys...
I trained her to survive.
Just like I trained you.
I'll tell you something.
She got a lot of talent.
Except for that blind spot
when it comes to
pieces of shit like you.
What is that
supposed to mean?
Hey!
I know what this is.
DR. ECKLAND: Professor
Thomas H. Crawford,
molecular biologist.
During the
Second World War,
he was one of a small number
ofAmerican scientists
who belonged to something
called the War Bureau
of Consultants.
The group was charged
with investigating
the feasibility of
a US bio-weapons program.
Looks like
Crawford was murdered
in his office
at Columbia University
on the evening of
September 1st, 1944.
His killers,
a man and a woman,
were never found.
What does this have
to do with the Twelve
Monkeys or the plague?
RAMSE: I remember there was
a time that they were
looking for the grave
of Thomas Crawford.
Thoughtabout
digging him up.
Exhume his remains?
For what purpose?
I don't know.
DR. ECKLAND: Test for DNA.
Maybe use it to
track Crawford to a
specific time and place.
Yeah. September 1st, 1944.
We have to go back.
We were there.
You were
also there in 1987.
But that little
trip didn't work out
like anyone hoped.
Look, they went back
and killed Crawford.
We have to stop them
and find out what
they were up to.
Could be his research.
It might be their
Plan B for the virus.
He might know something.
Crawford lived
decades before
anyone understood the basics
of RNA propagation.
His work would've
been useless
to the Monkeys.
JAMES: Maybe he was
ahead of his time,
and they killed him
before he got a chance
to prove it.
We should go.
TO 1944?
You want to just travel
back through time
100 years?
To a world at war.
Where people were
paranoid and archaic.
Cole can barely
navigate 2016.
I'm standing right here.
That's why I'd like
you to accompany him.
You've seen
the Messengers,
seen their faces.
You can identify them
before they strike.
The fight against
the plague starts in 2016.
The first battle may
very well have been
in 1944.
I'm not a time traveler.
Dr. Railly,
I understand, this is
quite a change in dynamic.
But he needs you
to guide him
through that world.
Katarina...
If Mr. Cole fails
we all fail.
Our reports show
that Professor Crawford
was murdered in his office
while a military ceremony
was taking place on campus.
The Secretary of
War was handing out
medals to war heroes.
Well, if the Messengers
found a way in,
so can we.
We've done it before.
This will require a plan.
On the ground.
No, not on the ground,
Johnny Night Room.
We need a plan now.
Are we sneaking in,
going undercover?
Bribe... We need money.
Money won't be a problem.
Here, they're worthless.
But in 1944,
their street value
will be substantial.
Trade it. Pawn it.
Wear it if you'd like.
You've never
splintered one person,
let alone two, this far back.
KATARINA: No.
And with the increase
of temporal anomalies,
this science has
become even more inexact.
The two of you could
arrive hours apart.
Maybe days.
So I'd suggest
a rendezvous point.
Emerson Hotel.
West 43rd.
Okay.
(SCOFFS) He's done
a number on her, huh?
You sure it's not
the other way around?
Mr. Deacon is
a necessary evil.
Security of this
facility is paramount.
What about Ramse?
I'll have a word
with Mr. Deacon.
Mr. Ramse was helpful today.
Then show him
that matters.
Let him see his son.
(BEEPING)
Coordinates are set
for Manhattan, 1944.
The window is holding.
Core's at maximum
and steady.
(SIGHS)
Give the word.
Initiate Splinter Sequence.
Been a while
since I heard that.
(MACHINE POWERING UP)
You're up. (SlGHS)
Be careful.
Behave.
(BEEPING)
(CASSIE SlGHS)
Match coordinates.
Follow the sequence.
(MACHINE POWERING UP)
(INDISTINCT CHATTER)
(GASPING)
MAN: Are you
all right, miss?
Miss?
Did you hit your head?
(SIREN WAlLlNG)
Quickly, inside.
What's happening?
Air raid.
Probablyjust a drill,
but one can never be sure.
This way,
into the theater.
No, I can't.
I have to meet someone.
I'll be all right.
Find shelter as
soon as you can!
(HORN HONKING)
(HONMNG)
(BELL DINGS)
CLERK: Miss...
The Emerson has
a strict dress code,
I'm going to have
to ask you to leave.
JAMES: It's all right.
Lady's with me.
Mr. Cole.
I'm so sorry, I didn't
realize she was your...
Wife.
Mrs. Cassandra Cole.
Thanks.
Nice suit.
They don't give
rooms to couples
unless they're married.
You had me worried.
The party's tonight.
lthoughtyou
might not make it.
How long have you
been here?
Two months.
It's all right.
Gave me a chance
to get things ready.
Sold off a bunch
of that jewelry.
Money's not a problem.
I need clothes.
l'm drawing attention.
I took care of that, too.
Sales girl figured
your size when I
showed her this.
I've got a couple
other dresses for you
upstairs, too.
Hey, you wanna sit down?
Grab a drink or something?
I've been drinking
whiskey sours.
You ever had one of those?
Oh, my God.
You like it here.
(CHUCKLES)
What's not to like?
We need a plan to get
into a secure military
function during wartime.
And I got us on
the guest list
with a generous donation
to the Columbia
alumni society.
I'm on top of it.
Just relax.
Try to have some fun.
This isn't a vacation.
(SCOFFS)
Mr. Cole?
Yes?
Telephone.
For me?
He asked for James Cole.
Hello.
Hello?
(LINE DROPS)
Nothing.
My apologies, sir.
There was a man
on the line.
It sounded urgent.
All right. Thanks, Stanley.
What are you doing?
This picture's going
to be taken tonight.
(SIGHS)
Could risk causing a paradox
if there are two of them.
We should burn those.
Where you going?
To get ready. (SIGHS)
We have work to finish.
(SCOFFS)
Recognize anyone?
WOMAN: (GASPS) James.
I'm so delighted
you made it.
lam so delighted you
could squeeze us in.
This is
Cassandra Cole, my...
Sister.
Janice Thompson,
with the alumni society.
We are so grateful
for your brother's
generous donation.
That's a lovely necklace.
Thank you,
don't you just love it?
A gift from
your brother.
(BOTH CHUCKLE)
He's such a catch.
We had to
get on the list.
(CAMERA FLASHES)
Hey, folks, how 'bout
a big smile, huh?
Could get you in
Stars and Stripes.
(CHUCKLES)
Oh, come on, sweetheart,
you can do better than that.
Perfect. Thank you.
Guess that's
out of the way.
Where are you going?
Drink.
Keep your eyes open.
BARTENDER:
Here you are, sir.
I don't think Director
Hoover would approve
of you drinking
while we're
on a detail.
Take a look around.
More Gls here
than the whole
European Theater.
Jerry's not dumb enough
to crash this party.
No reason not
to keep our wits.
One of these eggheads
mightjust help
us win the war.
(SIGHS) I gotta
hit thejohn.
Whiskey sour.
BARTENDER: Coming right up.
(SNIFFS)
Uncle Sam rationing
razor blades now?
Huh?
The beard.
This is New York City,
not the Appalachians.
You walk two blocks,
you'll run into at least
three barbershops.
I'm going someplace cold.
Someplace cold?
Like the North Pole?
Who we fighting
there, Shirley?
Excuse me?
(CHUCKLES) I'm just
busting your balls.
You just getting back?
From where?
Over there.
You got the look.
A man who's seen things.
Yeah, I've seen
a few things.
So who were you with?
Army, Marines?
The Seventh.
Seventh Infantry?
No shit. North Africa?
(INAUDIBLE)
The ashes of
yesterday washed away.
You are prepared.
Your mission is clear.
Listen, I really don't
want to talk about it.
As former Gls,
we have an obligation
to share our stories here.
Listen, asshole.
I'm just trying
to have a drink.
There you are, James.
Is my brother
troubling you?
Not at all.
Ijust wanted to hear
about this Seventh
he was stationed with.
What with him being
a war hero and all.
My brother was in
the Philippines in '42.
Bataan?
He fought the Japanese
for three months straight
before he was
taken prisoner and
forced to march 60 miles
from Mariveles
to San Fernando.
When he finally escaped,
he was shot twice,
including
down there.
So you will forgive him
if he doesn't want
to share his stories.
I'm sorry, kid...
Goddamn Japs.
No hard feelings?
No hard feelings.
Why did it have
to be down there?
I found one of
the Messengers.
She's with Crawford.
(INAUDIBLE)
Hmm.
There.
(KEYS JANGLING)
Shit, it's locked.
Come on.
What's wrong?
I have a wife.
A son.
I won't tell
if you won't.
(GRUNTS)
414.
MANTIS: Flowers have the
most beautiful of cycles.
Seed, rebirth.
Flowers have the most
beautiful of cycles.
Seed, rebirth.
No beginning. No end.
No death.
No blood to wash away.
Destruction. Decomposition.
Chaos, order, growth.
Life eternal.
This is not death.
There is no death.
It is only
the passing of time
that fools us into believing
that we are not forever.
(MUFFLED SCREAMS)
(SHUSHING)
We shall meet again.
In the red forest.
(MUFFLED SCREAMING)
(GRUNTS)
(GROAMNG)
WASP: Why didn't it happen?
He isn't the Primary.
(PANTING)
We have the right name,
but the wrong man.
Shit.
(SIGHS)
We're too late.
Jasmine and lavender.
Look familiar?
This is some
kind of ritual.
(SIGHS)
Cole, we gotta
get outta here.
Why him?
What's the connection?
Cassie.
CASSIE: What the hell
is this doing here?
Are you
kidding me?
You got good at this.
You won fair and square.
All right.
I want round two.
I'm gonna teach you
alesson.
Where did you go?
After Mom...
I went away.
Did you do
something bad?
Is that why they
have you in here?
Did somebody
tell you that?
I had to do something.
I had to do
something for you.
What?
(CELL DOOR OPENING)
Samuel.
(SOFTLY)
Did you tell him?
No.
Children shouldn't
be burdened with
the business of adults.
Your presence is
affecting the balance
of power in this facility.
You're telling me
that you can't stop
Deacon from killing me.
That's bullshit.
I've loved very
few in my life.
My father.
A husband, briefly.
And my daughter.
All three murdered
by a disease in which
you had a part.
VVhy?
To save the life
of your child whom
you barely knew?
You created time travel
to save your daughter.
You of all people
should understand.
Understanding does not
lessen my contempt
for you.
My selfishness was
in line with saving
billions of lives,
yours was bent
to destroy them.
I cannot protect you here.
If this mission's
to continue,
balance has to be restored.
(SIGHS)
Well, since I'm
gonna be dying soon,
are you gonna tell Cole
what you did to me?
There is a difference
between what I'm
choosing to do
and what I'm
unable to prevent.
Mr. Cole will have to accept
that it was the latter.
My son?
Samuel will always
have a place with us.
lwanna see him
one last time.
You just did.
Yes, sir.
Sir, we believe
the suspects may
have my badge.
Yes, sir.
(STAMMERS) Understood.
NYPD just found
two more bodies.
Glennis and
Russell Applebaum.
Goddamned war hero
and his wife.
They were supposed to
be there last night.
The shit heel
with the blonde
and the pecker sob story
are unaccounted for.
So it's gotta be them.
So then what's
with the flowers?
Some kind of ritual?
Yeah. Or a couple
of Axis spies
trying to make killing
one of our scientists
look like something else.
You do realize
how bad this is for us
ifwe don't find these two?
Really bad?
Yeah, Christ. Come on.
CASSIE: It's over.
We failed.
They killed Crawford.
We have no leads.
(SIGHS)
We have to just wait for
Jones to splinter us back
to 2044 and regroup.
Wait a minute.
What's this?
Psych evaluations.
For Thomas Crawford Jr.
Crawford's son.
These go back
to the 1930s.
Why would he wanna hide
his son's medical records?
Maybe he didn't
want people knowing
his son was mentally ill.
Like Leland with Jennifer.
This kid had a lot
of problems in school.
He heard voices,
suffered from delusions.
Diagnosed as
paranoid schizophrenic.
Where is he now?
Mission Cross
Mental Asylum.
Outside Newark.
(SIGHS)
He drew this when he
was just a little kid.
This isn't a coincidence.
He's connected to
all this somehow.
The Messengers
made a mistake.
They killed
the wrong Crawford.
Tommy and his father
have the same name.
When they figure this out,
they're gonna go after him.
Cole.
Locked up
for delusions and
voices in the head?
That sound like
anybody we know?
Jennifer Goines.
Yes, she's crazy, too.
How is this news?
She's notjust crazy. She's...
She's what? Special?
Yeah.
She is.
Maybe Tommy is, too.
Look, you might
not like Jennifer...
(CHUCKLES)
I might not like her?
You think
that's my problem?
I don't know.
What is your problem?
I can't trust you.
Simple as that.
I don't have time for this.
Oh, I'm sorry,
did you wanna go back
and finish the mission?
Because, hate to
break it to you,
but that's not really
your strong suit.
You can't do what
needs to be done.
Oh, this again?
I can't get the job done?
Just kill everybody?
That doesn't work, Cassie.
What about Aaron?
It worked for him.
That's not fair.
Aaron died...
Aaron died protecting me.
From you.
You think I don't know
what I cost you?
(SIGHS)
(SIGHS) Look, there's every
reason to think that
the Messengers are
gonna go after this kid.
They find him,
they're gonna kill him.
Now, you and me
together can stop them.
So what do you wanna do?
TOMMY: The Titan.
Everyone dies.
Everyone lives.
Primaries see.
Monkeys don’t.
Green to red,
everything changes.
Primaries see.
Mother becomes a daughter.
The Witness sees all.
Melting down.
Everything changes.
The boy is gone, is he?
The boy is gone.
The Witness...
Monkeys are coming for us.
(PANTING)
(DISTANT GUNSHOTS)
The Monkeys are
coming for me.
They're finally coming.
Final/y here.
(BELL DINGS)
Hello?
Cole.
This just happened.
He's in Room 313.
(MOANING)
Go back to sleep,
pnncess.
Late again.
CASSIE: He knew
they were coming.
He picked the lock.
What the hell is that?
A red forest.
How is any
of this possible?
How can he know?
Jennifer calls it
being Primary.
Primary?
They're connected
to time somehow.
They're notjust crazy.
The delusions, the voices
in their head, they're real.
What does all this
have to do with a plague
that ends the world?
Maybe the plague's
only part of their plan.
(GUNSHOTS)
Cassie, no.
Your weapons.
You don't belong here.
Neither of you do.
Where is the boy?
They don't know.
Move.
(TOMMY GRUNTING)
(PANTING)
Take the shot.
She won't.
She can't.
(ELEVATOR BELL DINGS)
Shit.
Cassandra.
Cassandra hates to travel.
How do you know my name?
James Cole.
This was not meant to be.
You shouldn't be here.
Don't worry. Cassandra
won't forsake you.
Do you know how
important you are?
No.
Not yet. How could you?
(GRUNTING)
What are you doing?
(SIREN WAILING)
Listen to me,
you're gonna walk
out that front door,
with your hands
overyourhead
and give yourself up.
No. No.
Tommy, the police
will protect you.
I had to protect you.
That woman kills
me today, not you.
With her dagger
made of bone.
This bone. Mine.
It's your grave they
dig up in the future,
not your father's.
Yes.
The Witness has spoken.
I can hear him.
I die today.
And his world of chaos
and his forest of red
will come to be.
The Messengers.
They need me dead.
VVhy?
Because of what's in here.
I help it think.
Just like your
friend Jennifer.
PoorJennWer
We keep the lines straight.
The circles circling.
We're the synapses in
its noggin, its mind.
lnterconnecting.
Tommy,
I don't understand.
MANTIS: (ON PA) Cassandra.
Listen.
(MUFFLED SCREAMING)
(JAMES PANTING)
Fourth floor, east wing.
Bring the boy.
(MUFFLED SCREAMING)
You're gonna save him.
I'll help you.
I'm not turning you
over to that woman.
She'll kill you.
Can't be stopped.
Tommy, there is no
such thing as fate.
OFFICER: All right,
come on, come on.
Let's go.
Keep your eyes open.
(THUNDER RUMBLING)
We are here.
(SIGHS)
Let's go.
Check in
the exam room.
OFFICER: All clear.
Send the boy.
Cole first.
Don't do it, Cass.
(GRUNTS)
The boy.
It's all right, I'll go.
Drop when I tell you.
Understood?
Understood.
Walk.
(SOFTLY)
Remember, James.
The only failure
is giving up.
Primary.
Tommy, now.
(PANTING)
I'm sorry.
I told you.
Today I die.
(GRUNTS)
JAMES: They're
gonna kill him.
It was his grave
they dug up.
She has a knife
made from his bone.
They're creating
a paradox.
MANTIS: Flowers have
the most beautiful
of cycles.
Seed. Rebirth.
(POUNDING ON DOOR)
No beginning. No end.
No death.
No blood to wash away.
DEACON: That’s far enough.
MANTIS: Destruction.
Decomposition.
Chaos. Order. Growth.
Life and darkness.
You know the drill.
MANTIS: We shall meet again.
In the red forest.
This is not death.
There is no death.
(GRUNTING)
It is only the
passing of time
that fools us into
believing we are
not forever.
(GASPS)
(ALL GROANING)
(BEEPING)
Real time tachyon readings
just shot off the scale.
A paradox.
Larger than
anything we've seen.
We're losing
their tethers!
Both of them?
ADLER: We're getting
transient echoes.
We've lost
their connection.
Oh, James, Cassie.
Those temporal anomalies
that we've been tracking.
This is it.
This is their origin.
(RAMSE GRUNTING)
(DEEP BOOMING)
What the hell?
(GRUNTS)
(GROAMNG)
(SCREAMING)
DEACON: What the hell
is happening here?
I don't know.
Move!
What on God's green earth
happened here?
(BOOMING CONTINUES)